# Public consultation on #ShareTheShore
Mid & East Antrim Borough Council have launched a public consultation on access to the council-owned beach at Greenisland.
You can access the consultation from [this webpage on the council's website](https://www.midandeastantrim.gov.uk/things-to-do/parks/countryside-access/public-right-of-way).
We've been campaigning for YEARS to get safe and reliable access to the beach for ALL residents and visitors - everyone should be welcome on our beach. Here are just a few reasons for saying YES to access to the beach:
## 1. HEALTH
  - Outdoor exercise is of proven benefit to physical and mental health. Walking and paddling on our beach is the perfect antidote to stress, and allows us to fill up our lungs with fresh sea air, while getting as energetic (or not) as we wish. It's available to all ages and abilities, provided the tide and the weather are right.  
## 2. SAFETY
  - At present, all access points to and from the beach are blocked along a distance of over 2km from Shorelands ("The Gut") to Torytown (Trooperslane). There are several tidal pinchpoints along this stretch, meaning that people who start out walking from one direction risk being cut off by the tide. This is an unacceptable situation, and in addition to the basic public safety aspects, places the Council in a position of liability, should anything happen to anyone venturing along the beach who is not familiar with the tides. An access point close to Jointure Bay or Island Park would considerably mitigate this risk, as well as permit regular safety assessments by Council personnel.
## 3. ENVIRONMENT
  - It is not at all likely that re-opening access to the beach will cause a large influx of people. A recent Habitat Regulations Assessment carried out for the Department of Infrastructure, looking at potential impact on birds on the Green Island concluded that there would **not** be any adverse environmental impact of opening access. We would argue that, on the contrary, opening access would be beneficial, since residents have an interest in protecting their environment, and would be motivated to organise beach clean-ups, birdwatching trips and other activities that will preserve, protect and enhance the shore, without generally incurring any cost to Council. If anyone were to potentially harm our environment, this would be rapidly detected, reported and mitigated - which cannot happen reliably if access continues to be blocked. There are several anecdotal examples of chemical spills, dead birds, pipe overflows, even boat beachings that have been detected and reported by members of the public accessing the beach.
  - Yet our environment is healthy and beautiful - this stretch of shore is enjoyed by many species of birds, including waders, divers, gulls, egrets, heron, merganser, geese. And then there are the seals - you can frequently see them either swimming in the water off the Green Island or lounging on the rocks off the point at Seapark. Humans and wildlife can and should co-exist.
## 4. COMMUNITY
  - Since the Pandemic we have all recognised the importance of coming together as a community to get to know each other, to help each other, to make Greenisland somewhere we can be proud of, whether we live on the Shore Road, the Top Road or off the Station Road. The beach is a perfect place for people to see each other in a relaxed, informal surrounding, and really appreciate where we live. Access to the beach also helps us look out for our neighbours, and considerably reduce the risks of crime or antisocial behaviour.
  - But it's more than that. The Green Island gives our village its name - it is *by definition* an indispensable part of our townscape character, and the shore should be accessible to everyone.
  - Just because it's accessible to everyone, that doesn't mean everyone is going to be on the beach all the time. One of the great things about the beach is that it is so quiet and relatively undisturbed. Even with secured access, however, it is very unlikely that large numbers of people will visit at any one time, so the prospect of neighbours being inconvenienced by big crowds is very remote indeed, and cannot be considered a valid objection.
## 5. RIGHTS
  - There is also the issue of basic rights. This beach is owned by the Council between the high and low mean tidal reaches from Shorelands to Kilroot. We the residents are ratepayers to Mid & East Antrim Borough Council. It is a violation both of our rights under the Access to the Countryside Order 1983 and our general rights as ratepayers that some residents who happen to live adjacent to the shore have unfettered access to Council property, while others who live just metres away (and who used to have access before rampant development, increased traffic and gating-off effectively removed their access). It is time that residents had their rightful access restored.

## Conclusion
There are many reasons why the residents and ratepayers of Greenisland deserve to have their access to their beach and their Green Island restored, and why the current denial of access is bad for health, environment, community, safety and residents' rights. Potential counter-arguments have been analysed and are demonstrably **invalid**. Establishing access would NOT damage the environment, would NOT significantly inconvenience residents, would NOT increase health and safety risks, would NOT increase liability to the Council, would NOT lead to additional risks. Quite the contrary, access would allow the environment to be improved, build community, improve health and wellbeing, reduce overall risks, and manifestly make Greenisland a better place to live, work and have fun - for all ages and abilities. Now **that's** equality, and that's why we residents love living here.
Say **YES** to #ShareTheShore!
